and welcome to Between Sermons, where we take what is happening on Sundays and we bring it into a conversation.
It is gonna be a really, really good episode.
As always, we have Taisha here, and Pastor Asa is gonna be helping us with this conversation.
It's gonna be wonderful.
It's gonna be funny already.
It's gonna be great.
What was that go?
Yo.
Sometimes I hit the very white voice, but anyway, I'm caught up.
DJ, DJ, I call him DJ Pastor Asa.
That's new.
That's new in the last 20 minutes.
Yeah, dates up.
This is getting weird and worse.
I love it, Ari.
I love you're glad you're with us.
Yes, this is great.
This is awesome.
Yes, I love it.
Thank you for the introduction, pastor.
So thank you for opening us up.
How was that, you know, taking the, feeling the shoes of Pastor Brent?
It feels different.
This chair feels intimidating.
Rumi.
I need to grow into it.
Shots fired.
OK, OK. You did well.
I was like, oh, she's opened before.
You know how to do this.
She memorized that scrubs.
I've listened to it every single week.
Thank you for being a loyal listener and participant like you've been on this show a lot of times.
So it's always fun.
So we're going to have a good conversation today.
We ended our sermon series Red Flakes this month.
How was it?
How was the series for you guys?
Um, red flags.
I don't remember nothing but yesterday.
No, I'm just playing.
It was really good.
Um, yes, it started off great, uh, with Pastor Brent.
I'm trying to remember what he talked about.
We had emotions.
And then we had communication.
And then we had savior complex.
Yeah.
The whole, I tried to block out the whole emotion thing.
That's probably why I didn't remember.
Red flag.
Right.
And then the communication part, I partially blocked that out.
But yesterday was great.
Okay Hey listen my wife learned a long time ago that I just like to file them things away and never bring them back out until they explode
I grew up with this whole idea of you just bottle it up like nobody will know just don't tell anybody so when I got married that was one of the biggest things like that I will just pretend like it didn't happen and then
Thankfully, I have this personality that doesn't really hold grudges very much.
So I can be mad at my husband, and 30 minutes later I'm like, what do you want to eat?
And I'm like, nothing ever happened.
But so he was the one that always said, like, no, we have to talk about it.
And I'm like, we don't.
Like, I will forget about it at some point, and we will be fine.
Sister, let me tell you, I would be scared to eat after we argue.
And then you go from, like, arguing, you're bad at me.
And you're like, what do you want to eat?
Nothing.
Nothing at all.
Because we didn't talk about what happened.
I'm growing.
Like, I'm getting better.
And now we are able to communicate and everything.
But yeah, just going out and expressing my feelings, it's weird.
Yeah.
So me and Tracy had a, I was about to say a big fight a long time ago about that because she was mad at me because I kinda quickly forgot about an argument.
It was like, I was like, oh yeah, we had an argument, but let's eat.
Who cares?
It's over.
And she was so mad at me that I was not still upset.
So I think it is a personality thing.
I just rather be happy.
Let's just be happy and have fun.
There's times that we have thought, and I'm like, this time, I'm not talking about it.
I am right.
I am not doing this.
Did it work?
I tried that exact thing once like you know what I'm writing this one and I'm gonna stand up and I'm gonna be mad.
And man, I just couldn't.
It was unnecessary.
I gotta live there.
Why am I trying to make myself be mad?
What are we doing?
I'm no longer mad.
Can I have some real humans on the show?
Smooth ones.
I feel like I'm a little one that ain't no broken, like everyone broken up in front of me.
People that actually acknowledge that they have emotions.
Where's the reflex?
Okay.
It's a reflex in there.
The problem is this.
If you do that, and then it does come to a head, or it comes to this volcanic situation in the end, and now you explode, that's where the problem lies in the explosion.
So it's best to deal with it in a moment and not fall it away.
I've learned over 18 years of marriage, but it still takes effort to not fall it away.
Yeah, and I think that for me, honestly, I know that this is not the episode today.
I'm all emotion.
This is a great conclusion.
But I remember growing up, I used to be a crier.
I was a kid that was always crying.
I was like, I got hurt.
They did this.
I was a title tale.
And I remember my mom, since I was little, saying, take it like a man.
She was like, I want to take como los machos.
Take it like a man.
If you're going to play, you're going to take it.
I started to just toughen up and it was just like, I'm gonna take it.
So I think that that made me honestly, like, therapy time.
That made me kind of just not express my emotions all the time.
Like, to the point that I get uncomfortable with crying.
You know, it's just like, I don't know what to do.
Like, don't cry like they're there.
Like, it's just like, I don't know because I grew up saying just take it.
You know, so, like not in a bad way.
It's not like, you know, like suffer abuse and don't do anything about it.
Like it wasn't like that, but it was like, you don't have to cry about every single little thing.
You know, just if you're playing and you got hurt, you chose to play kind of thing, you know?
So, exactly.
So that's not right though.
Don't take it.
Just express your emotions and I know the way.
This is the right show.
We can all learn from each other.
But we're growing.
Yeah.
She's growing, I'm growing.
So interesting, now I wasn't, I'm not a crier in the sense of that.
I'm good at sucking it up and it's not, I'm not crying over a skint knee and I fell and I don't cry over those types of things, but I can, I'm very extreme emotion.
So I'm extreme on the high side, I guess.
When I'm really fired up about something, it could move me to tears.
But I'm also very emotional when it comes to those I love.
That type of stuff can move me to tears very easily.
But like, she snacked me in the face.
I'm a man up.
I'll fall.
I'll fall in a hole.
I mean, I'm a laugh at all.
Who wants to do it?
I'm just saying.
So like, I'm not like, and my feelings ain't getting hurt.
Those types of emotions.
We're getting a line over here, please.
But I'm a hard lover.
I'm a love you hard type of thing.
You know what I'm saying?
If I love you,
I'm all the way in with you.
And if I don't then I don't hate you, but I'm just.
If I like you, I love you, all right.
I mean, I get no emotions if you don't like.
OK, now that we've covered you guys have no emotions, let's talk about communication.
We have no emotions.
We just don't know how to communicate those emotions effectively.
Say that again, Pastor Aston.
We don't know how to communicate them effectively.
So how does that series?
How does that sermon rock you guys before we get to save your crop?
Because you guys have it all.
I was sitting next to Tracy doing that sermon.
We was in the back, because I think it was maybe baptism week or I don't know what it was, but we were sitting in the back row hanging out back there as the communication was going on.
And we had a little tension the day before.
The Friday before.
So it was so funny.
We were sitting there going through the argument while Pastor Chris was up there talking about communication.
It was amazing, but what's good about it is we're able to sit there and talk through it and like,
Tracy was like, yeah, I was wrong and I was like, yeah, I was wrong on that one.
So it was, we were just basically processing it right there in the service in the back row together.
It was great.
It was awesome.
So it was good.
I enjoyed it.
And then I think that for me, that's something like I said, the brand really stressed out when we first got married.
Cause that was when I was just like, we're not going to tell anybody.
We're not going to talk about anything.
It's just, you know, like wherever it happens, it's here.
And like even, even between us, like I would just,
Just give me a few minutes, and I will forget about it.
We don't have to talk about it.
Let's no confrontation needed here, right?
And he was always like, no, we have to talk about it.
We have to talk about it.
And I will be like, just put it aside.
By tomorrow morning, we're going to be great.
And he was like, no, we're not going to go to bed if we're angry.
So he really pushed me to.
to communicate and he continues to do that because it is that's hard for me.
Like just being able to tell you everything that is in my head like I'd rather just bottle it up like honestly but I know that it's not healthy so he was always the one that pushed me to communicate the one that pushed me to talk about all of the things you know and
And I'm thankful for him because there were a lot of times that I had expectations, but I never even communicated my expectations and I would just get angry, right?
Like the dishes are still here and nobody watched them.
And he's like, well, you didn't ask me about the dishes, right?
So I would just get upset because I am once again doing the dishes.
And he finally told me one day, he's like, listen, I don't see the things the same way that you do.
But I don't mind helping.
Just tell me.
If you want me to do the dishes, just say, hey, can you do the dishes?
I don't mind doing it.
But if you expect me to just walk by and be like, oh, there's dishes.
Let me do the dishes.
It's never going to happen.
So I started learning that what he needs is clear ask, a clear communication, so that he can then help me when I need the help.
And I cannot just expect for him to know what I need or what I want all the time, because it's not going to happen.
And so I think that he has helped me and he has made me grow in communication, but it doesn't come natural to me.
Like I have to work and be intentional about it.
It all makes sense now, this savior complex.
You non-communicators, you just rather do it yourself to avoid conflict.
So let's go there.
Yes, 100%.
Well, don't put me in the savior complex.
I didn't feel like that one was for me.
We separated at the savior complex.
So before we dive in, Pastor, so what was the overall message of the Savior complex yesterday?
So if I can put it in one sentence, and I was asking actually, Brandon, I'm like, was it weird that I just repeated it like a million times?
But if I can put it in just one sentence, is that he is God, I am not.
And he is good at being God, right?
Like, I cannot do the saving for God.
I cannot pretend to have control because I'm not God.
So I just need to let him be God because he's good at it.
So if I can just put in just one sentence, that will be it.
Yeah, that's good.
Okay.
As you were unpacking this message, I know you shared your heart.
You said, I'm going to open this up to share my heart.
How was that for you as a communicator of the message yesterday?
Awful.
Awful?
Like the amount of time that I was trying to pass the message to everybody.
I'm like, it's written.
Do you want to just read it?
And everybody said no.
But no, it was difficult because
It's different when you are talking about something that is really personal.
That adds a layer of vulnerability that is intimidating.
On top of that, it's not something that is resolved.
You can be vulnerable and say, but God delivered me, and God did it, and it's all good now.
But for this one, I am literally showing you a wound that's still bleeding, and that it very much hurts.
you know so it was really really difficult.
It is not about what other people are going to think or anything like that it was more of.
This is something that I am struggling with this is something that I so that's probably one for for the people that I love.
That I have been running myself crazy trying to
to help them trying to take pain away, trying to bring them closer to Jesus, trying to make them see that they are valued, trying to make them see that the enemies lie into them, all of the different things.
And when you are talking about something that is so deep and so personal, it's hard.
So that's what I said, it was awful.
I think that it was what God wanted us to talk about.
And I just trust that he was able to use that for a lot of people, but yeah, just being that transparent, because there's a level of transparency and there's when you actually open the door a little bit more and you let people see a lot more, you know, and that's how I felt.
Yeah, very open.
Yes.
So when you were going through the message, did you realize that this was an area where you were still actively
having to surrender to God, that savior complex, or was it, I know you're still in the middle of those situations.
How did it really impact you when you realized, like, man, I have this issue?
Like... Well, that is not something that I realized as I was preparing for this message.
This is something that God has been teaching me for two years, you know?
So, it is a message that has been in my heart for this whole time.
just because that's what I am living.
So it wasn't that I had to sit down and prepare and investigate or do all of the research that I usually do.
I was able to sit down and just literally write my life story.
So it was so different because it's not that I am telling you something that I study or something that I discovered or let me tell you the percentage of people that sometimes you're going to that research mode when you are trying to teach
I didn't have to go anywhere to find inspiration.
I just had to be like, this is all of the things that I am learning as I am going through it.
It's a lot of things that God has been showing me about myself, about the things that I'm doing about, and I could talk for hours and hours and hours because again, it's been two years.
It's been two years of lesson after lesson after lesson after lesson of just
letting God do what he wants to do and just settle down.
Because it was getting, it was, it was getting bad.
I don't know how deep you want to go in this, but it was, it was, I was, it was getting bad for me personally for, uh, for the very first year when just everything just start hitting, you know, we kind of started getting bad news after bad news after bad news and just, just more things coming and coming and coming.
I started getting really bad panic attacks.
Like I could not like,
anything will set me off, you know, because I was putting all of the pressure of everything on myself.
And it wasn't until I realized, like, you gotta surrender.
You gotta give control.
You gotta just trust that God has got it that I have been able to live.
Wow.
Yeah.
And maybe both of you guys can kind of answer this question.
Do you feel like, I feel like this whole series as,
playful as we tried to make it with the cute bumpers and things of that nature.
Red flames.
You said there are cute bumpers called her husband is in there.
Yeah.
He was in there in one.
He was in everyone.
But my whole creative team stepped up and did amazing jobs.
So it was cute bumpers to me.
But as you know, we tried to start on a light note, but it was really a heavy series because I feel it was a series that really put the mirror in front of
all of our faces in different ways.
Um, and even I shared in another podcast where I had a personal experience where I experienced healing and deliverance from like the message, the emotional, you know, a message.
Do you feel like it's something that people can experience freedom from like bad communication?
you know, emotions that drag you down and even the savior complex.
Is this something you can work yourself out of or do you really need the Holy Spirit to help you identify these and actually get set free from these things?
I feel like anything that needs getting set free from true freedom only comes one way in my opinion.
So for instance, you have AA and
There's probably a very high percentage of people that succeed, fail, succeed, fail, succeed, fail.
My guess, total guess is that when there's the Christ component mixed into those types of therapies and those types of support groups and things like that is where true freedom come from.
I could be wrong.
Maybe some people get free just with those programs.
But in my opinion, man, freedom only come one way.
But I'm a pastor, so maybe that's just a spiritual thing to say.
I don't know any other way to get free from anything.
What about your own personal experience?
I don't know any way to get free from anything other than actually yielding to the Holy Spirit in my life.
Because I mean, we deal with all types of stuff and it's not always big.
Don't seem like big things.
It's little things.
It's middle things.
It's all of the above.
And to me, being able to truly get free
is not just I stopped today.
Freedom is a forever thing.
So if you're gonna be free, meaning stay free, you're gonna have to do something.
You're gonna have to be able, you're gonna need something to count on.
You're gonna need to be able to walk with God through that thing.
Because as much as I don't do drugs and alcohol, well, I did at one point in my life.
So here's the thing.
I'm well aware that if I let go of Jesus, eventually over time,
drugs and alcohol gonna come back.
So I'm free, but not if I let go of Jesus.
I'm no longer free.
And it may not show itself in a week or a year or two years or five years.
It may take time for me to get back down that path, but at the end of the day, I'm gonna end up on that path unless I continue to hold on to Jesus.
So to me, whatever it is, it's gonna be acknowledging God and that thing continuously for the rest of your life to actually be free.
because you can be free today and bound tomorrow from all of this stuff, unless you hold on to Jesus.
That's my opinion.
That's great.
Yeah, I think you need both.
I think that you need God who is the one that gives you the freedom, because freedom only comes through him and gives you the desire to do something different with your life.
That repentance only comes
through the power of the Holy Spirit at work in your life, the conviction of God saying this is wrong.
But there's a part that we play in all of this too.
You have to put in the work.
After he frees you, you have to put in the work to continue to see God.
You have to put in the work with the moment that temptation comes to go back to the same thing, to say, no, I am a new creature in God.
I have to now think differently.
I think that it is both.
The closer you are to God,
the more that you can resist going back to the same patterns of life, but still you still have to put of yourself, you know, like I cannot just be like, well, God miraculously changed everything.
And I have never even worried ever again.
No, like, of course not.
Situations are going to pop up and I'm going to still going to want to be like, let me do something.
Yeah.
But I have to remember in those moments.
No, I trust God.
So it is
It is this partnership that we have with God that He does the ultimate delivery, but I have to continue to put in the work and the effort every single day to maintain what He has already done in my life.
Yeah, no, that's good.
Yeah, because I mean, I just really feel like I've been hearing stories of people being freed and testimonies and even struggles of people like,
Well, how do I know that I really have this issue?
And, you know, and I'm just wondering in my mind, like, man, this has to be something that we walk out with Jesus because we're going to get it wrong every single time.
Um, so what is some practical, what is a good starting point for someone who is struggling with that savior complex?
Like, how do they even identify it and say, cause some people may say,
I just like helping people, or some people may say, if I don't do it, who's gonna do it?
Kind of like what happened in that video yesterday.
So how do people start recognizing like, no, I'm stepping in the place of God.
I think the beginning of it has to just be taking it to God for him to show you the scripture she read.
Basically, Lord, show me what's in my heart.
Because without you examining that, you could be totally deceived and think that you're
in a certain place when God looks at it, you're actually in a different place than what you think.
So deception is real.
Some people think they're fine in a lot of ways.
And unless you, and that's Christians, non-Christians, we think we're fine.
But once it gets brought, whether it's through a message or through a friend or just through whatever,
Once you're made aware of it, are you gonna now say, well, okay, let me actually take this to God and see if I am struggling in that area or if this is a problem.
And then you have to act on it from there.
So I think you gotta start with acknowledging that there's an issue going to God about how deep that issue is and what you need to be doing about that issue.
And then it's the walkout process.
So what was, did that answer your question?
Was there more to the question?
No, it's just how do you identify because again, some people don't even realize they're in that savior complex space.
You know, like, you know, just thinking about our parents.
And even just like, if you if you find yourself stressing out about a bunch of stuff that you can't control, it's likely you haven't given that thing to God.
It's likely you haven't cast your care on the law because you continue to strive.
You continue to try to do things to make change or
to change circumstances that you ultimately cannot change.
So to me is like this total reliance upon God as much as it seems everything with God is by faith, right?
So we are saved by faith, by grace through faith.
For me to cast my care on God, let's say it's about my child, that's
That's going to take faith in believing that God actually is going to now carry that for you.
So it's not like, oh, well, that was easy.
I gave it to God and now I ain't got to do nothing.
No, you kind of have to keep your mind trained through his word to continuously keep that thing surrendered to him because it is so easy to just pick it back up.
One thing goes wrong.
One doctors report that, that is not right and right.
You write back carrying it again.
So to me, it's this constant reminder of, okay, I'm not gonna carry this.
And you know, at some point when you're carrying it, whether it be your body is physically reacting to it or your personality or your mood or the way you act is changing, marriage helps because if I'm changing, my wife can point that out to me like something's not right.
A good example, when I first became a pastor here, with the most first
I'll say five months, I'm not sure the exact date.
Tracy said, Asa, what's wrong?
She said, cause you're sleeping a lot and you're not cracking a lot of jokes.
You're not very joyous like you normally are.
And I'm like, no, I'm fine.
What you mean?
What's wrong?
What's the problem?
And she's like something wrong.
So I'm like, Lord, what's wrong?
You know what I mean?
And what I believe he showed me was you are carrying the weight of being a pastor.
And you can't, you're gonna need to, he said, this is how I feel like he said it to me.
In the same way that you cast your cares on me, you have to cast your pastoral job on me.
You have to cast those cares on me.
So I'm like, oh, that makes sense because I watched a mother who casts her cares on the Lord.
So that's kind of natural for me, not natural, but I've seen examples of it.
I know to do that.
But for some reason, I'm doing it in my life.
But I got this new job where now I'm hearing people's problems, seeing people's problems, giving advice, and now I'm carrying their issues with me.
I ain't even thinking about my own issues.
I'm carrying somebody else's issues.
That's terrible.
So the Lord had to show me, yeah, the same way you cashed your cares on me, you need to do that with the cares of others.
And I've been pretty good since then.
at least Tracy ain't pointed out to me that I'm off track again.
So for three years, I feel like I've been casting those cares on the Lord and I know that I have to continue to do that.
Like it can easily come a point where if I allow time to build up where I'm not doing that, it's gonna affect something in my life, my personality, my health, whatever it may be.
So it's a constant thing.
Am I delivered from carrying it?
Not if I let go of what God told me to do, which is cast it on him, cast it on him.
cast it on him.
So I gotta be mindful of that, that when I feel like work is weighing on me, I gotta reset and cast that care on the Lord.
So that's kinda how I deal with that long term.
And I think there are a lot of people who go around saying, I have a savior complex, right?
I think that even though there's a thing for some people who like to be in the spotlight and want to have the glory of
the outcome and all of that stuff.
I don't think that that is the majority of people.
I think that there's some people that truly do want to go out of their way and just fix everybody's problems because they want to be the center of attention.
And I think that that's real, but I don't think that that's everybody.
I think that a lot of us end up in this situation because life hands you all of this stuff and you're so overwhelmed that you feel like you have to do something.
Right?
And I think that you end up
exercising the savior complex out of necessity.
But I think that you can recognize it in your own life, and at least it happened for me, when I realized that I was trying to strategize how to change the situation.
You know, like something is happening, what can I do?
And like, instead of immediately going and saying, God, this is the situation that is happening,
what are you gonna do in this?
I was just trying to say, okay, how can I make it better?
How can I, you know, like, what can I say to them so that they will hear it and then they're gonna understand and they're gonna be like, yes, I want Jesus, you know, and like, in my head, I have this whole conversation and the next time they come and I'm gonna say this, so they will probably respond this way, so I'm gonna say that.
And I have a whole strategy and I set it out in place and it completely bombs and then I'm like,
But God, like this, but isn't it what you want for them to come back to you?
You know, it's like, well, yeah, but you are not doing it.
I'm doing it.
And I think that that's when sometimes you can realize like I am obsessing over the outcome so much.
that all I am doing is thinking about how I'm going to get there, thinking about what I'm going to say so that I can get there, thinking about the next conversation and the next interaction, how we're going to address this stuff.
And you're so overrun with it that you don't realize what God actually wants you to do.
You're trying to do the job that God has of himself.
And I cannot convict anybody of anything.
just period, I cannot change anybody.
So I just have to be obedient to what God wants.
And that sometimes is very scary.
Because when you feel like you don't have the control of it, like, I want my hands in it.
Like, let me just be busy doing something.
Because if not, then I just feel like I just in the sidelines, sitting there just waiting.
But that's what the word says, you know, that we are supposed to wait on the Lord.
And then it says that he is fighting for us.
All we have to do is be still.
But we don't know how to be still.
We are trying to strategize and try to do it and try to, you know, like, how can I take the pain away?
And how can I show them that this is wrong?
And what can I say to change their mind?
And you are consumed by all of the things that
can do and how can I show and how can I tell them and how can I make them see you know and and even though you don't necessarily want to be the the hero of the story you are putting yourself as a primary person in the whole story when the story was not even about you to begin with you know and that's what ended up happening to me like that that story that I told yesterday about me being in the kitchen
Like, yes, I am praying for them.
And yes, I am crying for them.
But the main person of the story is me.
Like, I don't like this.
I don't want this.
How can I make it better?
How can I make them change when if I just took a moment and realized all of the stuff that they are doing, all of the stuff that they are going through, it is being rooted out of deep pain that they are struggling with.
But I've forgot about that.
because I'm just thinking about what am I gonna do to fix it?
And then you end up forgetting about the actual person that is going through it.
So I think that that's something that we need to be careful because you need to just live it on to God.
So how do you know that you are getting here?
Like Asa said, you just feel heavier than you should be.
The word says that His burden is light.
And if your burden is incredibly heavy,
That means that you're carrying too much that you're not supposed to carry.
Yeah.
Oh, that's good.
Oh, that is good.
Easier said than done, though.
Yeah.
I was going to say because some people are in situations where it almost seems like it is God putting them in that situation to carry that burden.
And I know that sounds really weird.
But I'm thinking about a situation specifically in my family where
Um, a loved one have to stay with another loved one while they go through a very bad season.
And so we have one loved one who's like, Oh, I gotta help them fix their life.
Like that's why God brought them back here.
And I'm just like, it can seem like God is putting you sometimes in positions to rescue that person, but how do you decipher between like,
I should go above and beyond or I should just provide a space for them to live.
Like how do you maneuver that space?
I think as you were saying, it makes me think about something, I don't know if I mentioned it to my group or to staff, but I was talking about like, okay, I believe I'm called and I'm in the right place that I'm supposed to be here at Disciples Church as a pastor, right?
I'm like, but even within that, there's this day to day
um, obedience, walk acknowledgement of God that I have to have.
So there's, there's the obedience to go do the thing.
And then there's the obedience within the, within that season of life.
So kind of like, yeah, maybe it is a God thing for you to be able to help this person.
But within that, you have to be acknowledging God and seeking his counsel on the, the details of it, the day to day aspects of it, the timing of stuff.
Um, because
you can say, okay, I'm supposed to help with this and I'll just try to do it your way and never even go back to God and consult him about why he has this person in your life to begin with.
So it's like, yeah, it might be a God thing that they ain't in your life, but now what does God want you to do?
So I think that's really part of our process with anything, with any season of life, with anything God got you doing, okay, yeah, when you take that step, because a lot of times in my experience, God don't give you
all of this laid out roadmap.
He tell you to do something.
And then when you do that, you kind of be finding out what was next to do.
You know what I mean?
He told you to read a scripture.
He didn't tell you when you was going to have to actually use what he was having you read, right?
Because you were turning ran and said, Lord, I'm not doing that.
And I think that's what it is.
I probably would have ran if God would have showed me what he was doing.
I probably would have been like, yeah, I don't want to be a pastor.
Lord, I'm out.
What are we talking about?
So a lot of times is those little steps of obedience for one, strengthen you, give you more experience with God, helps you to practice listening and being obedient to what he's doing.
So it's like you're in this training with each step you take that will help you down the road with what God wants you to do.
So that's kind of how I see the thing.
I have no idea.
I just say that I have no idea.
But sometimes I'm in these situations here as a pastor at Disciples Church and I'm like, Lord, I have no clue.
But I believe he helps in those moments.
But then also I need to be doing my part and like staying in the word, staying in prayer, because it don't always have to be this crisis help moment.
because he really, I think God is good enough to prepare us before we ever get to some of these situations.
We may not know what the thing is, but he can be preparing us through his word and his word strengthening us for the moments to come.
And that's why it's getting in a word and prayer and fasting is not, you don't do this stuff out of duty.
You do it because you need to be in fellowship with God to receive the strength that you need, not only for ministry, not for,
for a job, which is ministry, just for life in general, for day to day life.
It would behoove all of us, and I don't even know how to use that word.
It would behoove us all to kind of be in fellowship with God.
And something that you need to keep in mind is, and remind yourself often, is that no, you don't rescue people.
Only God does that.
Like if I feel like
I am in this relationship to rescue them.
Then again, I am putting myself as the rescuer.
I am not the rescuer.
Goddess.
I am not the one that is going to convince anybody that they are doing wrong unless the Holy Spirit are working their lives.
So it's hard.
It's hard.
So how do you know how much to give?
How do you know how far you can go?
you're gonna go as much as God is giving you the green light for.
So it is, honestly, it's a moment by moment.
It is a situation by situation.
It is day by day.
It is conversation by conversation.
I know that it is not the answer that most of us want, because we want a plan.
Just tell me what to follow and I'll follow it.
But I think that that is the importance of being close to Jesus is that it is conversation by conversation.
It is this conversation about
about speaking some truth or this conversation just about loving people.
How many times can I just say it's wrong, it's wrong, it's wrong.
At one point they're gonna be like, oh no, she's coming again, she's just again gonna tell me all of the things that I'm doing wrong and that I need Jesus.
Right?
So you start getting people to tune you out.
So you have to be very
very strategic in how you do things, and the only strategy that you can follow is the one that the Holy Spirit is giving us.
So what I think about is the friends, you know, they brought the cripple men to Jesus.
So they are doing as much as they can.
They realize the room is full, so we are gonna make a hole in the ceiling, right?
And we are gonna bring you down.
But they are not the ones saying,
I'm gonna heal you.
Their only job was to bring the person to the feet of Jesus.
Not to do the saving.
So I think that we are gonna go as far as we can, and we're gonna do as much as we can to bring people to the feet of Jesus.
What the outcome would be, that is up to Jesus.
But we are just gonna speak truth, we're gonna speak life, we're gonna be loving, we're gonna be kind.
You're gonna do your part because that's what we're supposed to do.
But it is not my job to say, okay, in this conversation, you say yes to Jesus.
That doesn't happen that way.
I wish, but that is not it.
So my job is to bring opportunity after opportunity after opportunity for you to be able to receive something from God.
It is now up to you and the Holy Spirit what happens next.
And when I flip that, then I am putting the burden of their salvation on me.
And I can't forgive anybody since.
I can't do any of those things.
So it is just remembering.
I am just in this relationship to be an extension of the love that God has for you.
So I'm just going to show you love.
I'm just going to show you grace.
I am just going to speak life when I can.
And in that one, it's also a little tricky.
Because you cannot always just be saying Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, right?
Because some people are not ready for that conversation yet.
Some people are not ready to just, you know, receive the words that are true because
At this moment, it just feels like judgment or it just feels like hating or it just feels like wherever it's happening in their lives.
So sometimes you just kind of like I call it a hidden run.
So, you know, like I've been doing that a lot with with with some people in my life that I just hit and run, you know, like I just get close and I'm like, I can no way to see what God does to you.
Bye.
We are walking around or wherever, and I'm like, oh, I love you so much.
And God loves you so much too.
OK, what about this?
You know, like, change the subject.
Like, we are not going to have a discussion or we're not going to shut down about this.
Like, it is like a hit and run.
Like, I'm just going to.
plan a seat of truth, and then we're gonna go somewhere else because I know we're not ready for this conversation right now.
But that doesn't mean that I'm not gonna say anything.
So sometimes it's just the little, it's the little bit.
And then you just believe that all of those seats will bring forth something.
And I know that God does it, it's just, you know.
And early in it, I like what you said, what you stated more and more times, but
Yeah, it's God wanting you to speak this word of truth or to just love that person.
And, you know, sometimes we think we know, but we really don't know what he wants us to do in those moments if we don't allow him to tell us what he wants us to do.
You know what I mean?
To try to be sensitive in those moments to, as to what to do, kind of came up in our meeting, or at least the scripture popped up in my head as some of the conversation was happening, but like how Jesus was moved with compassion with a lot of things.
We need to kind of be more sensitive to just following like, is this me just wanting to make something happen?
Or is this the compassion of Jesus that I'm extending toward them and trying to identify that stuff in some of these moments?
Because sometimes you want to just say, don't be dumb.
Just do this.
And that might be right.
But God might want you to just say, it's OK, baby, or whatever.
Brother, it's OK. And give him a hug.
When it's really I'm thinking, just don't be an idiot.
you know, but sometimes maybe later Jesus will let me tell him don't be an idiot, but right now he want me to hug this brother.
So some stuff seems real obvious to us, but that ain't how God wants you to do it that day or ever.
I don't know, but let's just try to be as sensitive as we can to those things.
But a lot of the, that's why the,
Being in the Word, prayer, fast, and that's preparing us for this stuff.
That's what we need to be, our hearts need to be prepared to go be God's hands and feet.
Because if we're not prepared, if we're not in a place of, you know, sensitivity to the Holy Spirit, we could screw some stuff up in the name of Jesus.
You know?
Oh my goodness.
Yes, that's true.
And that's the problem.
That's so true.
It's making me think about the word love so much, even just hearing what you're sharing about like how you can shut down and push people away when you just keep attacking them and you're not looking at what they're really going through.
I remember, I don't know why I had this vision, but what really changed me, like how I evangelized to people was this illustration guy had dropped into my mind.
He was like, what if you were at a party and you saw a girl and she was getting drunk
And everyone was like, Oh, look at her.
She's getting drunk.
We need to go tell her not to get drunk.
What, how could you change that person in life?
If you stop and be like, are you okay?
Like, is there something going on?
And then she tells you like, yeah, you know, I don't have any money to feed my children.
This is the last result.
How much more we can minister serve that person by not necessarily trying to,
You know, you could be a better person if you just give your life to God right now.
And just be like, are you okay?
And I feel like when you think about loved ones or people that we got put us in community with, like stopping to really see them through his eyes, like I think when he see us, he sees the real pains and the real things that's driving a lot of these actions.
And so I don't know, I think heart motives is good, but also being connected to Christ, I think we can see the real issues.
Yeah, and I think that you're hitting on the head with that one.
Like, sometimes in our zealous pursuit of getting people closer to Jesus, or getting people living a life that is better.
You know, you forget about the person.
You don't see, you don't hear, you don't understand where they're at.
All you want is for them to change.
And that's good.
I think that we should want people to come to Jesus.
I think that we should want people to live differently and to be who God has created them to be.
But sometimes you forget what they are going through and what pain has caused them to act in a certain way or just
What is bringing them to do this?
What is their background?
We forget so many things.
I remember a few months ago, after the whole thing with Charlie Kirk,
And there were videos of him just everywhere.
Like he just kind of floated the internet.
Right.
And I remember that I was just scrolling on Facebook.
I think he was and one of the videos popped up because that was all that was around on social media at the time.
And it was this this young person who who had transitioned and
The question was like, why do you dress like that or something like that?
I don't remember exactly the question, but his answer was so that I don't hate myself every time that I see myself in the mirror.
And when I tell that I started crying when I heard that, because sometimes you just attack the situation, the sin, or wherever, and you don't realize
that there's so much more inside.
The issue is less about what you're wearing today or what you are wanting to be.
And the bigger issue is the fact that you hate who God created you to be.
And sometimes you forget that.
And your desire to save somebody, you're just saying, this is wrong, this is wrong, this is wrong.
And they're like, listen,
I just don't wanna hate myself every time that I look in the mirror.
So sometimes you have to put your cape and your sword down and just sit down and listen.
Where are we coming from?
What is actually happening?
What is it that God needs to heal in you so that you can hear what he has for you?
But we forget that when we are trying to just solve the problem.
Yeah, that's good.
That is really good.
Like she said, you hit it on the head with that.
It's God sees past our sin.
So for us to not be able to see past somebody's sin and actually see the heart is a problem, definitely.
I learned that hard lesson.
And it wasn't hard because I didn't have no consequences for him.
But the Holy Spirit, I guess, kind of, I believe, showed me that a while ago.
I told this story several times.
But walking through the mall, going to get my wife something for, I don't remember.
I was going to the Pandora store.
And two guys walked by holding hands.
And my first, at my first glance, just got this, you know, man, this, this disgust, like, oh, you know, this disgust.
And instantly it was like, I need you to see people how I see them.
I was checked in that moment in the middle of the mall by the Holy spirit.
Like, oh, I need to love them like the Lord love them.
Not that I did anything, said anything, or even dare would have.
You know what I mean?
If I'd have caught myself looking at them wrong, I could have checked myself.
But God was looking at my heart and how I responded and checked my heart in that moment.
Like you need to see them with the same love that I see them.
And I'm like, oh yes, you are right Lord.
My bad, you know?
Because it's easy for us to let culture, to let just life,
have us to get callous toward people and see the sin or see the differences versus seeing that this is somebody that Jesus died for.
And while they're alive, there's still an opportunity for them to receive that same salvation that I received as I was out being a fool living in sin in the same way and God was seeing me and not my sin and showing me his love.
So yeah, it really is, we have to really do our best to
not get callous toward people.
Yeah.
And that is the beautiful thing about this series is that we are not looking at other people, right?
We are looking at ourselves because as we are trying to see other people's problems and other people's mistakes, God is saying, what about you?
You know, like change, you need to change.
You're the one that needs to have some refining.
Yeah, they do too.
Sure.
But
Let's start with you.
Let's do something with you.
And just let him do something with the other person in his own timing, in his own way.
And we can just be used by him however he wants us to.
I think about the Bible and how Paul, when everybody was like, but I am a disciple of this and I am a disciple of that.
And he's like, what are you talking about?
planted the seed, the other one water, and it's God who is gonna bring the fruit.
So sometimes you don't know if you're the one that is just planting the seed and will never see a change.
But somebody else is gonna say something else and it's gonna be a little bit of water.
And then somebody else is gonna say something else and it's gonna be a little bit more of an awakening.
And one day the Holy Spirit is gonna bring the fruit.
So we cannot pretend to be
all and all for everybody.
My job is not take everybody to the finish line.
My job is just to be a part of the process in their life as God wants me to.
And just understanding that it is true power in God's Word and in the seed of the Word.
I'd say this to parents a lot whose kids are, you know, going astray but growing up.
You know what I mean?
It's starting to make their own decisions.
And it's like, hey, you've done what you can do.
You've had them in church.
You've been trying to live a life that reflects Christ.
It's okay because the word of God that has been planted in their heart can speak to them.
They've heard you.
They know what you feel.
But you've planted the word of God.
Trust that.
Trust that process.
Pray for them to be safe until they say yes to Jesus.
I mean really because the word of God and that experience for me
I've seen played out in so many times where I'm living a life that I know I shouldn't be living and all of the word that was planted and planted and planted and planted and planted in my heart from the time I was born until the time I finally surrendered spoke always.
I could be in the middle of sin and the word of God is speaking.
He's just rising up in me and I try to ignore it.
I was high for a decade trying to ignore the word of God that's in me speaking.
And the only way I could
could ignore it was to be high.
That's it.
Or I was being tortured by God's word, which is crazy to say, but in essence, it was God just drawing me and drawing me and drawing me.
And I was like, I just want to do it.
I want to do it.
Leave me alone, Lord.
Praise God.
He didn't leave me alone.
You know, and it wasn't any specific person that came and got me free.
It was the word of God that was in me.
It was God steady showing me his hand in things over the course of my life.
Like, man, all of a sudden I just couldn't stop seeing all of the good of God over the course of my life from us being evicted one morning to in a better place by the end of the night.
I don't know how that happened.
It wasn't because my mother had it.
It was because God, it was because somebody from the church is like, well, we got a place you can live with praise the Lord.
Saints, you know what I mean?
Or this happened or that happened.
And God just began to just, he just kept replaying this stuff in my head.
He just kept showing me all of this goodness and the good that he's been.
And scripture just rising up in me.
In the same way you can sit here and a song from your childhood that you ain't heard just rises up, what you plan in your heart will rise up.
But the difference is the power of God's word and actually changed the situation.
You know what I mean?
So when that's been planted, that's really the key is, man, plant the word of God.
If you're in the middle of sin, start planting the word in the middle of it.
It'll help you.
You don't have the strength to do it.
So plant the word as much as that feels like sacrilegious.
Listen, the word is what changes.
Plant the word in the middle of your sin until you can get out of it, because you trying to do it ain't doing it.
Period.
That's not gonna work.
So man, it's God's word that changes.
Ooh, y'all preaching out here, okay?
And next time you go to Pandora,
Brand, we'll love to go with you.
I have to let them know we need to take a date to Pandora.
Actually, if I turn...
Invite David, if you like David or something.
I feel drunk.
Well, I kind of overplayed my hand.
Tracy told me, don't go to Pandora no more.
It was an easy gift for you.
I was running the Pandora.
She was like, enough.
I have enough Pandora.
I was like, it was easy.
Not Eva is into Pandora.
I had to pick it out for my baby.
It's really funny.
Well, as we land the plane, I want to do something a little different because I feel like I feel like some people probably need encouragement with this entire
series, but specifically the savior complex.
Because I think that there are some believers who really want to help people that they love.
And so how can they do that in a healthy way?
Maybe give them a takeaway on how they can do that in a healthy way to encourage them.
Definitely help.
Don't just close your arms and just be like,
Well, if guys gonna get them, then go get them.
You know, help, love on them.
But make sure that you become a safe space for people.
That they don't feel judged, that they don't feel like a project to you.
You know, because sometimes when we are so immersed into savor mode,
We start seeing people as a project, right?
Like this one is broken, let me fix it.
And when this one is done, then let's fix her.
And then when that's done, like people are not projects.
People are the creation of God that he has placed close to you so that you can love on them.
So love on them with everything that you have.
Give your time, give your energy.
But I also remember that you also are important.
And sometimes when you go into Savior mode, you completely forget about you and you cannot give out of an empty cup.
And when you are at your best, you can give your best.
And when you're at your worst, you can only give worse.
So make sure that you are spending time with God.
Make sure that you are replenished.
Make sure that you are rested because you need it.
And just love.
Just love, just love, just love.
And just remember it is not
up to you what happens next, it's up to God.
And if it's not good, that means it is not done because God only does good work.
So if he doesn't look good right now, God is not done.
But he will finish it because that's what the Bible says, that the one who began the good work will finish it until the day of Jesus.
So if it's not done, just be patient.
And I don't like that word because that means you have to sit down and wait.
You can do it because God is with you.
I love that.
It's funny she says she don't like that word.
So as she was talking about the love, I'm thinking about first Corinthians 13.
The love is patient.
The love is patient and kind.
And I was more thinking about the long suffering part of it.
But it's kind of two fold because like you said, you have to take care of yourself.
I think a huge part of that taking care of yourself is taking care of yourself, letting God take care of you.
through his word and through prayer and things like that so that you have the strength to love patiently and long suffering.
You know what I mean?
So you can love properly because it's not about you, but it is about the health of you to be able to do it right.
You know, so to love like God wants you to love, you totally have to receive that from him.
Like you have to
You have to receive it to give it out because that don't make sense.
Love is patient.
Love is kind.
Love doesn't think of itself.
You know what I mean?
It's not self seeking.
All of those things, yeah, it sounds good, but to do it, that gotta come from you being filled up by God and now being able to go do it and then filled up again and being able to go do it and kind of standing that, oh, I gotta be filled up with the love of God to go give this love of God.
You know, it's kind of this cycle of,
of you giving what you get from God.
So, yeah.
And if I can leave everybody with a Bible verse that you can pray, you know, because I think that something that I've learned in this season is that praying a scripture is the most powerful prayer that you can actually pray.
Because that's what God already had established for us.
In 2 Corinthians 7-10, it says that Godly grief
produces repentance and leads to salvation.
So pray that over the people in your life who are not doing or living the life that Jesus had for them to live that they will not just feel sorry that they will not just feel remorseful that they will not just be like
Man, that was a bummer.
Like I should have not done that.
But that it will be such a grief that is coming straight from God, from the Holy Spirit's conviction, that actually will produce repentance, which means a change of mind and a change of heart and a change of behavior, a change of direction.
Because when that happens, then it's gonna lead them to salvation.
It's gonna lead them to the feet of Jesus.
So that is that godly grief that produces repentance and leads to salvation.
So second Corinthians seven, 10.
Amen.
No, that is that's good.
Well, the first takeaway is go watch that sermon from pastor.
So she did a fantastic job with just breaking down the savior complex.
She even talked about pride and she gave us some scriptures to stand on.
So it was just really good.
I think my takeaway from just the entire series is we need God.
I mean it's really I'm learning and I've been a believer for a long time, but I am learning I need God every day every seconds every hour and
And the things that have made the biggest changes have only happened through Christ.
So being delivered, being set free, living in joy and not feeling that heaviness only came through guys.
So, um,
You gotta lean on him.
So for 2026, we're not leaning on our own understanding.
We're leaning on Jesus.
And so that is my takeaway from this.
And so I just encourage you to go back and listen to the whole series, the red flags, emotions, bad communication, savior complex.
Keep it on repeat this whole holiday season.
Okay.
We got to get through Christmas.
New Year's.
Just go back to it.
That'll be a tool that you can carry for this year.
And yeah, I pray that it bless you.
And we all love you here at Disciples Church and we're praying for you.
And we don't take this lightly.
We are really praying that you find, you know, true freedom in these different areas so that you can just live a healthy life and be whole.
So you can go make disciples.
That's ultimately what this thing is about.
And so, all right.
Until next time, we love you.
Well, quick question.
Yeah.
Have you ever saved a cat?
Let us know in the comments have you ever saved the pets life because I have I thought she was delivered from that The first point was pride The first point was pride Cheer the music Ruben We're out